# Constants

An integer constant like 123 is an `int`.
A long constant is written with a terminal l or L as in:
```c
12345678L;
```
An integer too big to fit into an `int` will be taken as long.
Unsigned constants are written with a terminal u or U.
The suffix ul or UL indicates unsigned long.

Floating-points constants contain a decimal point (123.4) or an exponent (1e-2) or both;
Their type is double, unless suffixed. The suffixes f or F indicate a float constant; l or L indicate a long double.

The value of an integer can be specified in octal or hexadecimal instead of decimal.
A leading 0 on an integer constant means octal.
A leading 0x or 0X means hexadecimal.
Octal and hexadecimal constants may be followed by L to make them long and U to make them unsigned.

```c
0XFUL
```
is and unsigned long constant with value 15 decimal.

A **character constant** is an integer, written as one character within single quotes, such as 'x'. 
The value of a character is the numeric value of the character in the machine's character set.
For example, in the ASCII character set the character constant '0' has the value 48, unrelated to the numeric value 0. 
Character constants participate in numeric operations just as any other integers, although they are most often used in comparison with other characters.

Certain characters can be represented in character and string constants by escape sequences like `\n`(newline), these sequences look like 2 characters but represent only one.

In addition, an arbitrary byte-sized bit pattern can be specified by
`\ooo`
where ooo is one to three octal digits (0...7) or by
`\xhh`
where hh us one or more hexadecimal digits (0..9,a..f,A..F).

So we might write:
```c
#define VTAB '\013' /* ASCII vertival tab */
```
or in hexadecimal:
```c
#define VTAB 'xb' /* ASCII vertival tab */
```
The complete set of escape sequences is:

| Escape Sequence | Description |
|-----------------|-------------|
| `\a` | alert (bell) character |
| `\\` | backslash |
| `\b` | backspace |
| `\?` | question mark |
| `\f` | formfeed |
| `\'` | single quote |
| `\n` | newline |
| `\"` | double quote |
| `\r` | carriage return |
| `\ooo` | octal number |
| `\t` | horizontal tab |
| `\xhh` | hexadecimal number |
| `\v` | vertical tab |

The character '\0' represents the character with value 0, the **null chracater**.

A **string constant** or **string literal** is a sequence of zero or more characters surrounded by double quotes, as in:
"I am a string"
or
```c
"" /* the empty sting */
```
The quotes are not part of the string but serve only to delimit it.
The same escape sequences used in character constants apply in strings; `\"` represents the double-quote character.

Technically, a string constant is an array of characters. The internal representation of a string has a null character '\0' at the end, so the physical storage required is one more than the number of characters writtent between the quotes.
This representation means that there is no limit to how long a string can be, but programs must scan a string completely to determine its length.

The standard library function `strlen(s)`returns the length of its character string s, excluding the terminal '\0'.

```c
/* strlen: return length of s */
int strlen(char s[])
{
    int i;

    while (s[i] != '\0')
     ++i;
    return i; 
}
```
`strlen` and other string functions are declared in the standard header <string.h>

DO DISTINGUISH between a character constant and a string that contains a single character.
- 'x' is an integer, used to produce the numeric value of the letter x in the machine character set.
- "x" is an array of characters that contains one character and a '\0'.

There is an other kind of constant, the **enumeration constant**. An enumeration is a list of constant integer values, as in:

```c
enum boolean {NO, YES};
```

The first name in an `enum` has value, the next 1, and so on, unless explicit values are specified.
If not all values are specified, unspecified values continue the progression from the last specified value.

Names in different enumerations must be distinct. Values need not be distinct in the same enumeration.

Enumerations provide a convenient way to associate constant values with names, an alternative to `#define` with the advantage that values can be generated for you.
